Here I go!
I need to release the brake
and that allows the stop to go through.
So this whole unit, I believe,
has been here since when they first built the building.
There were two prior owners
to this building going residential.
It was originally a stable.
All the carriages were on the ground floor
and all the horses came up
because real estate, even over 100 years ago,
was so expensive.
It was cheaper to go up, as opposed to go wider.
Starting at the end of the Civil War up until 1900,
this area was really the epicenter of New York City.
All the wealthier citizens would have had carriages,
and they would have needed to keep
their horses and stables relatively near their homes.
So there must have been quite
a few stables in the area.
It was just something that was central to the culture.
One of the major reasons this area
started developing was the building of the Fifth Avenue Hotel
at the corner of 23rd and Fifth Avenue.
The building with the elevator
would have been located right about here,
and then about a block and a half away
would have been the Fifth Avenue Hotel.
It occupied the whole side of Broadway
and Fifth Avenue here.
The building with the elevator was probably built in 1888
and at that time it was a five-story brick stable,
and the owner was E.A. Darling,
who was connected with the Fifth Avenue Hotel.
He was in charge of buying all the food for the hotel.
So I think they were just entrepreneurs
and they saw an opportunity to invest
and make some more money.
The elevator was new at that time.
Before the advent of the elevator,
the higher rooms were considered to be less desirable
because people had to walk up all those stairs.
But with the introduction of elevators,
they became the most desirable rooms.
We’ve been actually grandfathered,
but they passed the new safety law
and I think in 2025,
all of these will be outlawed.
So we’re just getting a jump on it
and trying to replace it now.
I’m sort of sorry to see it go.
Although it would be nice to have a push-button elevator.
Hello.
Hey, good morning.
Morning, how are you?
This is Tony, I’m Mark.
- Nice to meet you.
- I don’t want to shake your hand.
I’m already all dirty.
Okay, no problem.
I feel really sad.
Really sad.
I love this elevator.
Been using it for 40 years or more actually
and I’m sorry to see it go.
Well, would you like to do the honors?
Oh, boy.
Okay.
She goes.
There she goes.
Still shaking.
Yeah.
So what are you guys doing this morning?
This morning I’m going to be hanging this thing up above us.
Cutting the cables off the elevator.
Oh, no.
So this will be the last ride.
Should be the last time it runs on its own power.
Wow.
The electrical cables?
All of them.
Everything.
The hoist cables, the electrical cables, everything.
Everything comes down.
Going to the basement?
Yeah.
Well...
I think it’s sad.
I know.
It’s bittersweet.
Yes.
Hi.
Change is very difficult, in its way.
I’m used to change.
I generally welcome it.
Every time I get into the elevator,
I think about the horses.
I really do.
And what it must have been like to be in that elevator
with a 2,000-pound horse.
Very sobering.
This thing has been a part of my life for a while now.
It’s surreal to think that this is the last time we’re going to do this.
Out with the old, in with the new.
Yeah.
This one’s different though.
We’ve taken on a lot of elevators before,
but nothing really like this.
Nothing that was designed to haul horses up and down.
Yeah.
And that’s it.
Last time it comes up on its own power.
So when Tony goes to go up at the elevator,
that’s your knife switch.
One side of that is up.
One side of that is down.
Tony, go up with the rope.
Going up.
It’s got to rotate,
flop over,
make contact.
Up he goes.
Turn the motor,
which turns the gear up there,
and the bottom there is a worm gear,
it looks like a screw.
And on top, if you look in the back,
you’ll see the drum,
which has the cables on it.
That's moving the car up and the counterweight down
at the same time.
This is the only one I’ve ever seen like this
in my whole career.
As the rules change and the laws change,
it’s harder to make those old ones meet the new codes.
That’s what happened here.
At this point,
you can't meet new codes.
You can’t do a brake test on an elevator like this.
At some point, it’s just time.
Come back down, Tony.
So now he’s going to go the other way with it.
This blue thing right here,
this was added later on.
That’s a more modern brake than—
This thing just freaking exploded.
The motor just blew up.
Ghost.
Amazing.
What were the odds?
How far are you away from the top, Tony?
The motor just shorted.
Did a little more than spark.
It’s like a reality show.
We didn’t even plan for this.
No.
Good thing you’re getting a new elevator.
Because if you weren’t, now you would be.
Yes.
Can you climb out of the elevator at all?
The motor shorted out, yeah.
And he was coming down.
It was in downward flight for about 30 seconds
and then all of a sudden, it went bzzzzt
and that was the end of it.
That adds a lot of complication to this job.
Like, a lot.
Smoke?
Oh, yeah.
If you can, I think I need you to come here.
Gerard’s coming and Chris is on his way.
We’ll get this thing moving one way or another.
Alright.
So what do we have here?
How you been?
Good to see you.
Yeah, good to see you.
You sad?
I am sad.
She was.
I am too, to be honest with you.
I am really sad to see this go.
She was just saying all these nice things about it.
That’s like going down with the woman down the aisle
and getting married and she dies of a heart attack, huh?
Right.
So it won’t move at all?
No, can’t get it to go.
I can’t get it to go up or down right now.
Nothing.
After 150 years, you break the freaking elevator?
I know.
It's not my fault, but now it's my problem.
Where’s the hoist?
In the elevator.
Alright.
Go to work.
Yeah.
So we came here yesterday to survey the job.
There’s challenges with this one because of its age.
So in this age bracket that I’ve been around,
there’s definitely, I would say,
less than a dozen left total in the city.
I’ve put hands on three of them.
I like that there's not many of them.
Who really could say that they got to take an elevator out like this.
Most people in our industry have never even seen
an elevator with a leather belt before.
I’ve showed people videos and pictures
of this thing throughout time
and they’ve never seen anything like it.
So it’s cool to be a part of something like that
and it's cool to possess the skills
and know how to work on this.
I take a lot of pride in the fact that
our team knows how to do this.
We deal with plumbing,
we deal with electricity,
we deal with every aspect of a building you could think of.
We have to dabble in it somehow.
You can’t Google this stuff.
Anybody that put anything like this in
has been dead before I was born.
Part of our job is going to the job,
engineering it in your mind
so you could figure out how this thing comes apart
and then doing it.
But it's the first time you’ll ever do that.
And probably the last time.
But you have to be really good at it the one time you do it.
Will you miss working on this elevator?
No, I will not.
I won’t miss working on this, no.
So right now,
the elevator is being held up by an electric chain hoist.
We’re going to lower the car down to the basement.
We’re going to clear out the cables
that we just lowered down.
And then from there,
we will take off a wall of the cab
to start removing the counterweights.
From the top to the bottom,
one by one, we’ll take them out of the rack
and put them in the elevator with us
until the counterweights are removed.
The elevator’s last ride was when it came up.
There’s no power going to the elevator right now.
The main line is out,
locked out so no one else can touch it.
And that was just being manually run by a hoist.
Only by elevator personnel.
There’s a part of me, of course,
that’s very happy.
But I miss it.
And I knew I was going to miss it.
It’s very bittersweet.